Professor Charles
Bailyn: Okay.
The subject is special
relativity.
And right at the end of last
class, I had written down this
factor, gamma.
And gamma is the key thing,
which tells you how
relativistic you are.
Gamma = 1 over the square root
of [1 - (V^(2) /
c^(2))].
And we talked about this factor
a little bit.
If V over c is
equal to zero or approaches
zero, then gamma,
obviously, is 1.
And when gamma is 1,
that's the Newtonian
case--then, everything is just
like Newton's law said.
Okay.
On the other hand,
as V over c goes
to 1--that is to say,
as the velocity approaches the
speed of light,
this gamma factor goes to
infinity, because 1 minus 1 in
the denominator--that's zero in
the denominator,
so the thing has to go to
infinity.
And then, all these bizarre
relativistic effects start
taking place.
And the one we talked about in
particular came about from an
example of how this gamma is
used--namely,
that the relativistic mass is
equal to gamma times the rest
mass, which is the Newtonian
mass.
And, obviously,
if gamma = 1,
then the Newtonian mass is
equal to the--then,
the mass is equal to the
Newtonian mass,
and you're in Newton's laws,
and everything is fine.
When the velocity approaches
the speed of light,
then this total relativistic
mass goes to infinity--the
consequence of which is that you
can no longer accelerate,
regardless of how much--so,
no more
acceleration--regardless of how
much force is applied,
because force equals mass times
acceleration.
And if the mass is infinite,
then any amount of force will
not give you an acceleration.
An acceleration is a change in
velocity, and so,
the consequence of this is that
you can't go faster than the
speed of light.
It's also another side
consequence of
this--sorry--there was?
Oh, excellent, yes ask it.
Student: [Inaudible.]
Professor Charles
Bailyn: V--okay.
V is the velocity that
something is traveling.
There's no escape velocity
here, at the moment.
There are all kinds of
different Vs floating
around, so it's important to
keep them straight.
Yeah, can't--you can't go
faster than the speed of light.
A side comment from this is
that photons,
particles of light,
which obviously,
by definition,
do go at the speed of light,
have to have zero rest
mass--because otherwise they'd
have--they'd end up having
infinite mass and infinite
energy which isn't--which isn't
physical.
So, photons which go at the
speed of light,
for which gamma is therefore
infinite,
have to have M--this
little M_0
here, equal to zero.
So, you have zero times
infinity, and that can equal a
finite number,
otherwise they'd have infinite
energy.
Yes?
Student: I was just
wondering if we're talking about
velocity as a factor or,
like, the speed of light?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: At the moment what
I'm talking about is velocity as
a speed.
So, I'm talking about the
magnitude of the velocity.
And you can tell,
actually, that that's the case,
because it comes in as the
velocity squared.
So, even if it's a vector,
when you square it,
that gives you a scalar
quantity.
Okay.
So, let me go on from here and
talk about an intermediate case.
We've talked about V
equals zero, we've talked about
V equals c.
Let me talk about an
intermediate case.
And the particular intermediate
case--and this will show up on
your problem set – this is the
thing we didn't get to on
Thursday.
This is what's called the
post-Newtonian approximation.
This is when you're just a tiny
little bit relativistic.
So, V over c, or
more properly,
V^(2) / c^(2) is
small, but not zero.
And here, a little mathematical
concept that may have flashed
before your eyes when you were
in eleventh grade,
or something,
comes in, which is the series
expansion.
We won't do the mathematics of
this, but here it is.
If you take 1 plus epsilon
[ε]--and I should say,
epsilon is a--used by
mathematicians to mean something
small.
Famous mathematician named
Erdos used to refer to children
as "epsilons."
That seems to be carrying it a
little bit too far.
But, this is how mathematicians
think.
So, epsilon,
in this case,
is something that's much,
much less than 1.
And if you take 1 plus
epsilon--so that's a number
that's slightly greater than
1--and you take it to the
nth power,
you can then expand this as a
series.
And the series goes like this:
1 + n ε,
plus a bunch of other terms,
each of which is multiplied by
a higher power of epsilon.
So, there's a term in ε^(2)
and there's a term in ε^(3),
and so forth.
And this is an infinite series.
But the thing is,
if epsilon's small,
then ε^(2) is even smaller.
So, if epsilon's already small
and nε is pretty small,
then ε^(2) is far smaller than
that,
ε^(3) yet smaller,
and these are negligible.
And so, the approximation is,
(1 + ε)^(n) is approximately
equal to 1 + n ε,
if epsilon is much,
much less than 1.
So, here's what we're going to
do.
We're going to use this series
expansion, and we're going to
generate expressions for some
things--in particular,
the mass, but some other
things, too--where the 1 is the
Newtonian term.
And the thing represented by
this n ε,
which is much smaller,
is a correction to the
Newtonian term,
and is the first sign that
things are becoming
relativistic.
So this is, in this context,
going to be a Newtonian term,
and this is the post-Newtonian
approximation.
Okay.
Oh, so, let's just do an
example.
Let's think about the motion of
the Earth--the Earth's orbit
around the Sun.
Earth's orbit,
you may recall,
from the last section of the
class, how fast the Earth moves.
It's about 3 x 10^(4) meters
per second.
Thirty kilometers a second.
The speed of light is 3 x
10^(8) meters per second.
And so, V^(2) /
c^(2) = [(3 x 10^(4)) /
(3 x 10^(8))]^(2) = 10^(-8).
And so, that quantity,
which is going to turn out to
be the post-Newtonian effect,
is one part in 10^(8) for the
Earth's orbit.
And so, pretty small.
Considering that we think that
9 = 10, something in the eighth
decimal place isn't going to do
a lot of damage.
So, it's not a particularly
relativistic situation.
All right, so,
now I want to go back and I
want--that's just an aside.
I want to go back and apply
this approximation to gamma.
Gamma is equal to 1 / (1 -
V^(2) / c^(2)),
the whole thing to the ½
power.
That's (1 - V^(2) /
c^(2))^(-1/2).
I got to get a better pen,
sorry about that.
And now, this can be expanded.
This can be expanded in just
this kind of way.
The first term is 1.
Epsilon is - V^(2) /
c^(2).
n is - ½.
Minus times a minus is a
positive, so this is plus 1/2
V^(2) /
c^(2)--plus additional
terms,
the first of which is
(V^(2) / c^(2))
^(2),
which in the case of the Earth
would be 10^(16).
So, it would be vastly smaller
still, so, we ignore that.
And so that--and so,
you can substitute this for
gamma in situations where
V is kind of small.
For example,
let's go back to this mass
equation.
1 + 1/2 V^(2) /
c^(2).
This is the total mass.
Now--oh, let's separate these
terms out.
M_0 --that's
the Newtonian term.
And now, here's a
post-Newtonian approximation.
1/2 M_0
V^(2) divided by
c^(2).
Okay, high school physics
experts, do you recognize this
term?
Kinetic energy.
Absolutely right.
This is from high school
physics.
The kinetic energy--that is to
say the energy in the motion of
this object.
So what is this whole term?
This whole term is the kinetic
energy.
So, M is equal to the
Newtonian rest mass,
plus the kinetic energy divided
by c^(2).
Now, you'll recall that
E / c^(2) =
M.
So, this is the mass equivalent
of the kinetic energy.
So, given this nice
relativistic idea that mass and
energy are interchangeable,
well, here it is.
Here is the kinetic energy
expressed in terms of mass.
And so, this little equation
M = M_0
γ has a variety of
consequences.
When V /
c--V^(2) / C^(2),
really, goes to zero,
then it's just Newton.
It just says,
mass equals mass,
because gamma is equal to 1.
And that expresses an important
Newtonian concept,
that the mass of something is
an intrinsic property of that
object,
which doesn't change--which is
how things are in Newton,
but not how things are
relativistically.
In the other extreme,
where V^(2) /
c^(2) approaches 1,
this equation expresses the
fact that light--the speed of
light is a speed limit.
And in the post-Newtonian case
where V^(2) /
c^(2) is small,
but not zero,
this same expression expresses
the fact that E =
mc^(2).
So, all three of these concepts
come out of the same equation.
It's this kind of thing that
makes physicists say things
like, the theory of relativity
is incredibly beautiful.
It's hard to know--I realize,
it's hard to know what that
means, you know.
What makes a piece of
mathematics beautiful?
It's when you get a situation
like this, where a simple
mathematical concept sort of
spawns all kinds of new and
unexpected ideas,
depending on how you look at
it--and that they all kind of
come together as one.
I have this vivid memory in
graduate school,
I was sitting in a class,
you know, and the professor was
doing the thing that professors
do.
He was writing down all kinds
of miscellaneous information
really, really fast,
from relativity theory and
nuclear physics.
All sorts of stuff was going up
on the board.
I was doing the thing that
students do, where you
desperately try and write it all
down,
so that you can then go back
and figure out what the hell he
was talking about later.
And suddenly,
in the midst of this rather
typical class,
I realized what was happening:
that in about twenty minutes,
he was going to put all this
stuff together and prove
Chandrasekhar's limit.
We talked about Chandrasekhar's
limit a week or so ago.
That's the limit whereby a
white dwarf can't be bigger then
1.4 times the mass of the Sun or
it continues to collapse.
And, I suddenly saw where all
this was going and I sort of
wrote down in my notebook,
"Chandra," and underlined it,
put my pencil down.
And then, I just watched for
twenty minutes.
It was great.
It was--the only thing I can
compare it to is listening to a
great piece of music,
because it kind of unfolds in
time, and you see where it's
going, and it's just a great
feeling.
So, don't be condescending to
the physics majors when they're
working like hell on those
problem sets late on a Thursday
night,
because they have access to
realms of aesthetic experience
that you can only imagine.
But perhaps--it's true,
it's true, I promise.
But you have to work hard to
get there and ask questions.
So, at this point,
let's do the question thing.
Here's what I'd like to do:
talk to the people around you.
Introduce yourself to the
people around you--groups of
two, three or four will do fine.
And come up,
in consultation with your
neighbors, with a question to
ask.
Now, this could either be a
question of something that you
guys don't understand about what
I've said,
or something where the
question, if answered,
would deepen your understanding
beyond what I've said.
So, take a couple minutes.
Talk to your neighbors.
Make a friend.
Think of a question,
and in a couple minutes' time,
we'll regroup and I'll answer
some of the questions.
If your particular question
doesn't end up being answered,
you know, hand it in at the
end,
so that I know what you were
thinking of--and so,
definitely write them down.
And we'll try this out.
Let's see how this goes.
So, introduce yourself to your
neighbors and come up with a
question.
And when you have it,
put your hand up and ask it.
We'll come around and ask.
All right.
I've now heard the same
question twice,
so let me answer it,
and then we'll ask for other
things.
The same question,
which has been asked in a
couple of different ways,
is, what is mass?
That's an excellent question,
because it's awfully hard to
parse what's going on with this
M_0 and this
other kind of M,
and stuff, if you don't know
what the concept means.
So, that's a really good
question.
What's mass?
Mass is defined--you can think
of it this way.
What is mass?
Mass is defined as from this
equation, in a certain sense.
F = ma.
It tells you,
for a given object,
how hard it is to move--or,
more precisely,
how hard it is to accelerate.
So, higher mass requires
greater force to accelerate by a
certain amount.
It's a property of an object,
and it tells you how much it
resists being pushed around.
It's sometimes referred to as
"inertial mass" for this reason.
It's an expression of the
object's inertia--how much it
resists being accelerated.
And so, in Newtonian physics,
this is purely a property of
the object itself.
You can say,
if you've got a basketball,
or if you've got a car,
or something,
that the car has more mass than
the basketball.
Why?
Because if I go--do I have a
basketball?
I don't.
All right, car,
a car has--the lectern has more
mass than the little piece of
cardboard here,
because if I apply force to the
cardboard I can move it.
And if I apply the same amount
of force to the lectern,
I move it a whole lot less.
And so, what is the difference
between those two things since
the force applied is the same?
The difference is that this one
has a whole lot more mass.
And in Newtonian physics,
the mass is a property of the
object.
In Einsteinian physics,
there is something that's the
property of the object--that's
its rest mass.
But the inertial mass,
the amount by which it resists
being pushed,
is also a property--not just of
the rest mass,
but also of its motion.
So, if this were moving at a
large fraction of the speed of
light and I applied some kind of
force to it,
it wouldn't move nearly as much
as it does--or,
it wouldn't change its motion
nearly as much as it does when
it's standing still.
And so mass--the inertial mass
of the thing varies depending on
how fast it's moving.
So, that's an important
question for understanding this.
Let's see--yes?
Student: Let's say that
you're on Earth.
If you were to push an object
that's standing still versus an
object in motion,
you're going to have the same
affect on it?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: No,
you're not going to have the
same effect on it,
because if the object in motion
is going to have a little extra
piece to its mass.
Student:
Okay, so it has a very small
effect [inaudible]
Professor Charles
Bailyn: A very,
very small effect.
In fact, if you try this on the
Earth itself,
which is moving at 30
kilometers a second,
that effect is going to be 1
part in 10^(8).
So, that's what we calculated
before, where we--where was it?
Yeah, here it is.
That's this purple part here.
You calculate V^(2)
/ c^(2),
that's 10^(-8).
So, it's a difference if
something moving even as fast as
30 kilometers a second,
which is pretty fast--this
difference is only going to
be--actually,
1/2 of 1 part in 10^(8).
So, it's a hard thing to see.
Now, the place you can see this
stuff is in particle
accelerators,
because there,
you can take sub-atomic
particles and accelerate them to
very close to the speed of
light.
And then you see these very
dramatic effects.
Yes?
Student: So,
if something's going at the
speed of light,
so that the force you would
need to stop it is infinite
[inaudible]?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: Yes,
yes, that's correct.
You cannot stop something
that's going at the speed of
light, because the force you'd
need to accelerate it,
which could either be a--making
it faster or slower,
would be infinite.
But, that's why photons don't
have any rest mass at all.
That statement that you made
only applies to something which
has non-zero--greater than zero
rest mass.
Student: And they never
go?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: And they never go to
the speed of light,
because you can't get them that
fast.
You'd need an infinite amount
of force to get it to go that
fast.
Photons are a different story.
And, of course,
if you stop a photon,
it disappears.
Because if it's going less than
the speed of light,
then it's got no energy,
because it's a finite gamma
times zero rest mass.
Yes?
Student: What about all
the weird, like,
time stuff you always hear
about?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: The weird time stuff
you always hear about.
Excellent.
Yeah, okay.
A couple of other Lorentz
transformations.
Time is equal to gamma times
time zero.
This is time dilation.
The faster you go,
the slower your clock works.
This is the origin of all that
nice science fiction,
where you get on a rocket ship.
You go close to the speed of
light.
You go somewhere.
You turn around.
You come back.
Your clocks are running slow,
so, it only takes a year in
your time.
And you come back and
everybody--you know,
a hundred years have passed.
All your friends are dead,
and so forth.
So, that's a whole science
fiction thing.
There's also length contraction.
That looks like this.
Take the pen. Put it in motion.
Make that motion at some
substantial fraction,
at the speed of light,
and it gets shorter.
Amazing.
We'll talk more about this in a
little while.
Yeah, these are--these things
with the gammas in them,
they're collectively known as
the Lorentz transformations.
That's just a name.
And these are the ways in which
basic properties--space,
time, mass--change with
velocity.
Yeah?
Student: So with the
equation, M =
M_0 times
gamma.
M_0 is the
intrinsic mass?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: Yes.
No, no, no,
M_0--yes.
Let me think.
M_0 is the
intrinsic mass.
M is the inertial mass.
Student: Okay.
Professor Charles
Bailyn: That's a way of
thinking about it.
Student: So,
if something was traveling at a
very small speed,
wouldn't it mean that
V^(2) / c^(2) was
close to zero?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: Yes.
Student: Which means the
inertial mass would be close to
zero?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: No.
If it goes--so,
you were right up to the very
end.
Remember how this works.
γ = 1 / [(1 - V^(2) /
c^(2))^(1/2)]
If V / c goes to
zero, gamma goes to 1.
And in that case,
the inertial mass is equal to
the intrinsic mass.
And, if it's going faster,
then the inertial mass is
bigger than the intrinsic mass.
The intrinsic mass is usually
referred to as the rest mass.
Student: Well,
then how did you get
V^(2) / c^(2)?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: Ah.
That's the second term of the
series expansion.
1 / [(1 - V^(2) /
c^(2))^(1/2)]
expands to be 1 + 1/2
V^(2) / c^(2) plus
other terms.
Here's the first term.
That's the rest mass,
because we're going to multiply
this by M.
And this is then the kinetic
energy divided by c^(2).
Student: So the
[inaudible]
Professor Charles
Bailyn: It's the second
term.
Student: [inaudible]
inertial mass can never be
zero.
It'll just go closer to the
front?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: Yeah,
the rest mass doesn't change.
If V^(2) / c^(2)
goes to zero,
what happens is,
the kinetic energy goes to
zero, which is exactly what you
want it to do.
Yes?
Student: How does--how
is momentum conserved when
something's relativistic?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: How is momentum
conserved when something's
relativistic?
Excellent.
There is an equation of
relativistic momentum.
And it's that thing that's
conserved, which is different
from M times V,
because V behaves
differently and M behaves
differently.
And you can work out exactly
where all the gammas go in that,
and I don't remember it off the
top of my head.
But there is a quantity that is
conserved, but it doesn't look
quite the same as the Newtonian
quantity.
In the limit where the velocity
is small, it reduces down.
The first term of that series
is M times V.
Yes sir?
Student: When you define
mass by the equation force
equals mass times the
acceleration,
how, then, do you define force?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: Yeah,
okay.
So, this gets a little bit
circular, right?
Okay.
Force--you can define it either
way.
Force is the thing that--force
is the ability to do work.
That's the technical definition.
Force: ability to do work.
And then, work also has a
technical definition.
The problem with these things
is you kind of do--if you just
define them all around the
circle,
they do tend to come back and
bite themselves in the tail.
I agree with that.
But force is also related to
energy.
How much energy is required to
exert a certain force?
So, all these things,
interrelate--but it is
definitely true that there's a
circularity to the definitions,
if you follow them all the way
around.
So, if you keep asking that
kind of question,
I'm going to go around until I
get back where I started from.
Yes?
Student: Why is the
speed of light constant in all
frames?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: Why is the speed of
light constant in all frames of
reference?
That's problem two of your
problem set, and I'll come--I'll
say a few things--that's an
insufficient answer,
but I'll come back and say a
little bit more about that in a
minute.
Yes?
Student: We were just a
little bit confused with the
original Lorentz
transformation--how,
in most cases,
that transforms to E =
mc^(2).
Could you show that to us?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: Yeah.
So, let's go back and take
another look at that.
All right, so,
here's what I'm going to do.
First of all,
I'm going to take gamma--this
quantity--and I'm going to
expand it.
This is equal to gamma,
and now I'm going to expand it.
That gives me 1 + 1/2
V^(2) / c^(2).
Let's see what have I done with
the--my--the pieces of paper are
getting out of order,
here.
Here it is.
So, inertial mass is equal to
the rest mass,
times gamma.
So, now, I'm going to
substitute in this approximation
for gamma.
And then, I'm going to multiply
M_0 through
both terms.
So this is--so,
the inertial mass is equal to
the Newtonian mass,
plus a term that looks like
this.
One half M V
squared is, in Newtonian terms,
the kinetic energy.
And it appears here,
divided by c^(2).
And so, a way you can write
this is that the inertial mass
is equal to the rest mass,
plus the kinetic energy,
divided by c^(2).
And that is an example of the
fact that energy divided by
c^(2) is another way of
expressing mass.
Student: Then,
how is it not saying that
energy over c^(2)
equals--why is it not from the
energy of c^(2),
literally, algebraically,
whether it be M minus
M_0 [inaudible]
Professor Charles
Bailyn: Oh,
which M are you talking
about?
Student: Yes.
Professor Charles
Bailyn: Yeah,
its M_0 here,
and it's M over here.
And so, somebody
asked--actually you're now the
second person who's asked this
question, so I better answer it
explicitly.
I answered the question,
"What is mass?"
What's energy?
E = mc^(2)
squared.
So, what do I mean by this?
M--this is the inertial
mass.
So, that's M,
which is equal to,
in this case,
M_0 plus
kinetic energy over
c^(2).
And notice the difference here.
This is one kind of energy.
This is kinetic energy.
That's the energy in--that's
the energy contained in the
motion.
Another way you could write
this is the rest energy over
c^(2).
So E,
here, is the total energy.
And there are two kinds of
energies being expressed here.
There's a rest energy,
divided by c^(2),
and there's a kinetic energy,
divided by c^(2).
But in the Newtonian case,
you think of them as two
completely different
things--whereas,
in the relativistic case,
they're two manifestations of
the same thing,
and they add to make the
inertial mass.
Yes?
Student: At what
velocity are a fractions of
c-- would something need
to be traveling on Earth for us
to--for there to be a
perceptible relativistic effect?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: Okay.
So, how fast do you have to go
to have a perceptible
relativistic effect?
That depends how good your
instruments are.
If you've got something that
can perceive--that can measure a
velocity or an energy or a mass
to eight decimal places,
then it doesn't have to go so
fast.
If you have something that's
fairly crude,
then it has to go much faster.
But I should say--special
relativity, these Lorentz
transformations,
have been measured upside down
and backwards in the laboratory.
This work to many,
many decimal places.
Here's an example.
If you take sub-atomic
particles that are unstable,
that decay--they have a half
life, so, half of them will
decay in ten seconds,
or something.
And you take those particles,
and you accelerate them to a
large fraction of the speed of
light.
It takes much longer for them
to decay, because they're going
so fast and their time clocks
slow down.
One manifestation of this is,
there's a kind of unstable
particle that's created at the
top of the atmosphere.
These things are called "muons."
What happens is,
cosmic rays come in.
They blast the top of the
atmosphere.
They make these muon things.
The muons propagate close to
the speed of light,
and they arrive at Earth.
And you can measure,
if you have a little muon
detector--never mind what the
heck a muon is--but imagine that
you have something that could
detect it on Earth,
and you see a whole bunch of
these things caused by cosmic
rays.
But, if you ask,
how long did it take them to
get from the top of the
atmosphere down to where your
muon detector is,
it's much, much longer than
their decay time.
So, you really shouldn't see
any of them at all.
But you do see them.
And the reason is because
they're going at close to the
speed of light.
And so this is--these effects
are observed and measured to
great accuracy in the laboratory
and in astrophysical situations.
Yes?
Student: I know it's
practically impossible,
but what would happen here if
we--if you were to go faster
than the speed of light?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: Faster than the
speed of light?
Well, you'd have super infinite
mass.
This would not be good.
Well, okay.
So, let us imagine what the
equations would do.
What would happen is,
as you go faster than the speed
of light, if you try and slow
down toward the speed of light,
you'd have the same problem.
That is to say,
it would take you more and more
effort to slow down to close to
the speed of light.
And the consequence of this is
that if you're faster than the
speed of light,
you can't slow down to the
or slower than that.
There are hypothetical
particles--and this doesn't
exist in the real world--but,
there are hypothetical
particles that do this.
These are called tachyons.
They have the odd effect that
they go backwards in
time--because again,
if you believe the equations,
right?
Time dilation.
T = γ
T_0.
Now, look at gamma.
Square root of 1 - V^(2)
/ c^(2).
So, this is awkward.
If V is bigger than
c, this is a square root
of a negative number.
That becomes imaginary. Right?
Square root of a negative
number--hard to do.
So, this becomes imaginary.
So, your time axis becomes
imaginary, and all sorts of very
bad things start to happen to
you.
Yeah, yes?
Student: So,
as your mass increases with
velocity, do you just--does the
particle or the entity have a
greater gravitational effect?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: Does it have a
greater gravitational effect?
Excellent question.
That's the next lecture,
because that's general
relativity.
And what you're doing is you're
assuming that Newtonian gravity
is correct.
Newtonian gravity--gravity is a
force proportional to the mass.
Turns out--and this is one of
the things that led Einstein to
his theory of general
relativity--turns out that
relativistically,
it's--that gravity should not
be thought of as a force,
at all.
And there's a whole different
way of thinking about it,
and your question has to be,
in a kind of Zen sense,
unasked.
We'll get to that.
We will get to that.
But the point is that,
in relativistic theory,
gravity is not a force,
anymore.
And so, the question doesn't
arise in quite the same way.
Yes?
Student: [Inaudible.]
Professor Charles
Bailyn: Sorry?
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles
Bailyn: E =
M_0 /
c^(2) + K.E.
Yeah.
You have to put--you have to
get the c squareds in the
right place, and that's
basically a unit conversion.
Student: What's
K.E. / c^(2)?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: No,
E - Student: Oh,
E.
Professor Charles
Bailyn: - is equal to
c^(2)
M_0 +
K.E.
Basically, what I've done is
I've multiplied this equation by
c^(2) on both sides.
Yeah. Yes?
Student: I don't know if
this is really a worthwhile
question, but,
what is--what are the
implications for,
like, what time is?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: Well,
this is the-- Student:
If you have one meaning of what
time is?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: Right.
So, what are the implications
for what time is?
This is the big stumbling
block, from a philosophical
point of view,
to all of this stuff.
Turns out, time isn't absolute.
That is to say,
one has the feeling,
as we go through our everyday
life, that,
you know, my watch and your
watch are kind of measuring more
or less the same thing,
to the extent that they're
accurate to do so.
So, if we have identical,
perfectly accurate watches,
and we go about our daily life
and come back,
they're going to read the same
time at the end if they read the
same time at the
beginning--because time moves
the same way for me as it does
for you.
This turns out to be false.
And so, time is not an absolute
quantity.
Neither is space,
for that matter,
because length changes also.
This is quite disturbing.
And the reason it's so
disturbing to us is our brains
have evolved in a situation
where we're always moving
really,
really slowly compared to the
speed of light.
And therefore,
you don't have to worry about
this stuff in everyday life,
down to some factor of
10^(-12).
But, nevertheless,
it turns out to be true that
time does not tick off in an
absolute way.
And this is why people get so
freaked out by this
stuff--because it seems counter
to everyday experience.
But, it can be measured.
And it turns out to be true.
So, the Newtonian case,
what we're used to and the way
our brains work,
turns out to be only an
approximation of the way things
really are.
There are other things that are
conserved, no matter how fast
you go.
And we can get to that at some
point--but time isn't one of
them.
Yes?
Student: Why is the
speed of light this magic
number?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: Why is the speed of
light this magic number?
Okay.
So, the fact that there is a
magic number comes out of this
kind of equation.
Because, when this quantity is
equal to 1, bad things start to
happen, and all the equations
blow up.
The fact that it is the speed
of light that happens to be
that, in that equation,
is because light consists of
particles with zero rest mass.
And a particle at zero rest
mass has to have this thing go
to infinity or it doesn't exist
at all.
Student: [Inaudible]
Professor Charles
Bailyn: Why is the world
this way?
Student: Well
[inaudible]
Professor Charles
Bailyn: That I--no,
seriously, that's what you're
asking, and it's a good
question, and I can't answer it.
You know, because this is where
physics turns into--seriously,
this is where physics turns
into theology.
You can't--all you can say from
science is that this is the way
it works.
You can't answer the "why"
question.
You got to talk to my
colleagues in some other
department about that one.
I'm sorry, because it's the
question one would really like
to know the answer to,
right?
But that one I can't cope with.
Yes?
Student: Thinking about
black holes, when the light
enters the black hole across the
event horizon,
I've heard that it often times
orbits or may orbit Jupiter?
How is that possible if the
light doesn't have mass?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: Okay,
so, the question is,
can light go into orbit around
a black hole?
Basically.
And the answer is, yes it can.
And then, the next part of the
question was,
how does that work if it
doesn't have any mass?
You're asking the same question
he did over there,
because what keeps it in orbit
is gravity.
And if you reject the view that
gravity is a force,
then that question doesn't
become important.
And we'll--as I say,
we'll talk about that later.
So, that, again,
is a question that pops up
because you're thinking of
gravity as a force.
Student: How does--with
that equation,
not to say "why," if it is,
why it is, but where--how is it
derived?
Professor Charles
Bailyn: How is it derived?
Okay.
So, let me go on with the
presentation in the last couple
of minutes of the class,
here.
Here's--so, let me ask your
question in a different way.
Here's what--why did Einstein
think this up?
What a crazy-ass thing to do,
right?
Why not--there's little
discrepancies when things are
moving at the--at high speeds,
but who the heck cares?
It's hard to measure things at
high speeds.
Why not just stick with Newton,
which has done very well for
two-and-a-half centuries?
Here was the problem.
In the late nineteenth century,
there were a whole series of
experiments, all of which,
one way or another,
had the same
consequence--namely,
that light--the speed of light
is the same in all--for all
observers.
Okay?
That's extraordinarily weird.
It's not obvious immediately
why that's so weird.
But let me try and explain it.
Here's a guy,
and let's say he's a baseball
pitcher, and he's throwing a
ball.
So, here's the ball and it's
moving this way at some
velocity, which we'll call
V_1.
And you're down here,
or over here somewhere,
it doesn't really matter.
You're down here,
and you've got a radar gun,
and you measure the velocity of
that baseball.
How fast is it going?
Well, if he throws it at
V_1,
and you're at rest with respect
to him, then you measure
V_1.
Now, supposing we put our
pitcher on top of a moving
train, all right?
And the train is moving at some
other velocity,
V_2.
So, the guy's on top of the
train.
He throws it 100 miles an hour.
The train's moving at 100 miles
an hour.
You're standing next to the
track with your radar gun.
How fast do you measure that
baseball to move?
Well, you measure a total
velocity, which is the sum of
the velocity of the baseball
with respect to the train,
and the train with respect to
you.
Okay?
That seems pretty clear.
But now, supposing this
guy--instead of throwing a
baseball, he's got a flashlight.
So he's got some light source,
and the light is moving at the
speed of light,
because that's the speed that
light moves.
And you've got some device,
down here, which measures how
fast that light moves along.
And he's standing at rest with
you.
And you measure the speed of
light, and it comes out to be
c--not surprisingly,
the same speed of light.
Now, let's put the guy on the
train.
Here he is, moving at
V_2,
or any V.
You would expect that the speed
of light that this guy measures
down here would be c +
V_2.
Right?
Because, it would the speed of
light with respect--from the
flashlight, with respect to the
train, plus the speed of the
train, with respect to you.
You would expect it to be
c plus
V_2.
But it isn't. It's c.
V_total =
c, not c +
V_2.
Very weird.
The speed of light is the same
no matter how fast you're moving
relative to the source.
You could be moving at 99% of
the speed of light,
toward a light source,
and it would not be coming at
you at 1.99 times the speed of
light.
It would be coming towards you
at the speed of light.
You could have a friend who's
standing still,
and you would both measure the
same speed of that light,
even though you're moving
really fast compared to your
friend.
Very strange.
And there are a whole series of
experiments, the most famous of
which is something called the
Michelson-Morley experiment,
which, one way or another
demonstrated that this was the
case.
What to do?
And, what Einstein did was,
he said, hmmm.
Okay, various things were tried.
The experiments were wrong.
The equations were slightly
screwy, who knows.
But Einstein took--Einstein's
great genius was to take this
seriously, and to say,
okay something is really
screwed up with velocities.
What is velocity?
Velocity is space over
time--miles per hour.
Therefore--so,
space and time are messed up
when you get close to the speed
of light.
Now, of course,
it also has to be true that
when you're going slowly,
the original Newtonian result
is recovered.
So, this is your problem set.
I have written down the
relativistic formula for the
addition of velocities.
And your problem set is going
to be to use that series
expansion to demonstrate that in
the Newtonian limits,
you get this.
And in the limit where one or
the other of those velocities is
the speed of light,
you get this.
So, you'll see.
The algebra's actually not so
bad.
And that's what prompted
Einstein to go on this whole
rampage, generating all of these
gammas, and so forth.
It was the experimental
evidence that there's a serious
problem with velocities.
Okay, we got to stop.
More next time.